Tumour heterogeneity, i.e. the genomic diversity of cancer cells within a single tumour, is thought to 
be the source of chemotherapy resistance. In many cancers, this heterogeneity is not limited to 
point mutations but includes large scale genomic rearrangements and endoreduplications that lead 
to aberrant copy number (CN) profiles. Reconstruction of the evolutionary tree of cancer within the 
patient allows us to quantify and understand the aetiology of tumour heterogeneity. In some 
cancers, such as high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC), CN profiles predominate. However tree 
inference is hindered by unknown phasing of major and minor CNs, horizontal dependencies 
between adjacent genomic loci and the lack of curated CN profile databases to use as a reference for 
probabilistic inference. 

We recently developed MEDICC (Minimum Event Distance for Intra-tumour Copy number 
Comparisons), an algorithm for phylogenetic reconstruction based on CN profiles. MEDICC uses 
finite-state transducers (FSTs) to encode a minimum evolution criterion that determines pairwise 
evolutionary distances between CN profiles. This minimum-event distance computes the smallest 
number of amplification and deletions of arbitrary length that are necessary to transform one 
genomic profile into another. The FST-based approach allows us thereby to model dependencies 
between sites, similar to the problem of modelling indels on trees in traditional phylogenetics. Using 
this approach we are able to phase major and minor CN profiles to the parental alleles and infer 
trees and ancestral genomes, while minimizing the overall tree length. The distance measure is 
formulated such that the resulting matrix of pairwise distances has a direct mapping to a positive 
semi-definite kernel matrix. This allows us to perform principal component analysis in evolutionary 
space and use this embedding to numerically quantify tumour heterogeneity and other quantities of 
interest, such as the degree of clonal expansion, using spatial statistics. 

I will talk about the basics of FST-based phylogenetic inference and explain how they can be used to 
model genomic rearrangement events with horizontal dependencies. I will explain how this 
approach implicitly maps genomes into a feature space in which we can quantify heterogeneity. 
Finally, I will present clinical results that show how this quantification of ITH can predict resistance 
development in the hospital.
