Inferring evolutionary trees from genetic data is a classic and hard problem in biology.
We have recently published an algorithm for estimating gene tree topologies along a
genome which scales to millions of trees with millions of tips. We have also just released
a fast method to date (that is, to infer branch lengths for) these trees.

Both methods are based on the concept of a "tree sequence": a recently-introduced
efficient format to store the correlated evolutionary trees that describe the full genomic
ancestry of a set of genomes. While initially developed to describe the genetic history
of individuals within a species, tree sequences are also starting to be used to analyse
relationships between individuals from multiple closely related species.

The topology estimation method, called "tsinfer" (tree sequence inference), is composed
of two heuristic steps. The first step uses the distribution of mutations to estimate
partial fragments of ancestral DNA sequence, roughly ordering them by age. The second
step uses a highly optimised tree-based HMM algorithm to match fragments against each
other and build up a tree-like structure at each position in the genome. The resulting
structure can be thought of as a large network of nodes connected by edges,
where each edge connects a child node to a parent node over a specific portion or "span"
of the genome (this is similar to the Ancestral Recombination Graph, or ARG).

The challenge of estimating branch lengths on trees in a tree sequence can be restated in
terms of placing dates on tree sequence nodes. Our dating method, "tsdate", treats the
date of each ancestral node as a hidden state, and estimates the probability of different
node ages by considering the inferred tree sequence as a Bayesian network. In particular,
each node is given a prior probability of being in one of a fixed number of time slices,
then a two-pass algorithm iterates over all the edges in the tree sequence, updating
these priors to take account of the mutations and span associated with each edge.

In this seminar I will describe the workings of both the tsinfer and tsdate algorithms,
demonstrate their speed and accuracy, discuss their limitations, and show their application
to a variety of genetic data sets, including ones with historically sampled individuals,
and with multiple species present. I will also describe a new topology-based measure,
based on genealogical nearest neighbours, which naturally summarises genome-wide
relationships between individuals in a tree sequence.
